---
pageName: inspired-and-inerrant
blogTitle: "Introducing Inspired and Inerrant: A New Guide to the Old Testament"
titleTag: "Introducing Inspired and Inerrant: A New Guide to the Old Testament"
blogDescription: 'Author Sean Pokall gives a brief summary of his book "Inspired
  and Inerrant: A New Guide to the Old Testament". This book (which was granted
  an Imprimatur by the Archbishop of Tuam) provides an introduction, summary and
  additional commentary to the Old Testament, with reference to the
  foreshadowing of events to come in the New Testament. '
author: Sean Patrick Pokall
date: 2023-03-23T11:21:30.375Z
tags:
  - post
  - religion
  - featured
image: /images/blog/jerome.jpg
imageAlt: Saint Jerome writing the Vulgate
---
<!--StartFragment-->

“Ignorance of Scripture is ignorance of Christ.” These words of wisdom, given to us by Saint Jerome more than 1,600 years ago, remain as true for us today as they did in the time of this great Father and Doctor of the Church. Having undertaken the tremendous task of translating the Sacred Scriptures from their original languages into Latin, this meticulous and diligent Saint from Late Antiquity gave us the Church’s officially promulgated Latin version of the Holy Bible – the Vulgate.

Along with Sacred Tradition (the teachings of Jesus Christ as given to the Apostles), Sacred Scripture is one of the two sources of God’s Revelation about Himself to His creatures. It therefore follows that Sacred Scripture, which we more commonly refer to as the Holy Bible, is a primary source of the history, teachings, doctrines and morals of our One, Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church.

And yet, almost two thousand years after our Church’s institution by none other than Our Lord Himself, ignorance of Scripture continues to remain at an all-time high, with the flock of Christ failing to feast on every Word that proceeds from the mouth of God. Why is this? we might ask. From a purely practical point of view, Biblical ignorance in a 21st century nation such as Ireland, can now only be attributed to the human will as opposed to any of the former obstacles that may have proven genuine impediments to an adequate knowledge of Scripture.

Literacy rates have reached unprecedented levels, meaning that the literal inability to read the Bible does not apply to Ireland or indeed to the vast majority of countries in the world. Similarly, the excuse of not understanding Hebrew, Latin or Ancient Greek is negated by the enormous amount of translations available to us in our own mother tongues, flawed and deficient though some of these translations may be compared to their original and Inspired sources. Furthermore, with unhindered access to libraries, bookshops and of course, the internet, the Word of God can now be accessed and consumed at any time, from any place and at the mere push of a button.

Commonly hailed as the “most published book in the world,” the Holy Bible is a book that practically everyone (at least in the “free Western World'') has access to, but hardly anyone, and here I refer in particular to practicing Catholics, has actually read from cover to cover. It is of course true that by going to Mass every single day of the week (even though mere observance of Sunday attendance and Holy Days of Obligation is required), we will eventually have been exposed to the entire Canon of Sacred Scripture through the Missal and daily readings. But apart from observing the precept of Mass attendance, Holy Mother Church also encourages us to read, meditate on and pray with the Scriptures outside of the context of the Sacred Liturgy. As it is the Inspired and Inerrant Word of God, the reverent and spiritually motivated reading of Sacred Scripture will increase our faith in our Creator and Redeemer, our hope in His Heavenly Kingdom and our love of Him who first loved us [(1 John 4:19)](https://drbo.org/cgi-bin/d?b=drb&bk=69&ch=4&l=19-#x).

“Easier said than done!” You might be thinking to yourself. “But what about that huge and daunting section of the Bible called the Old Testament? How am I supposed to get through that without giving up as soon as I get to Leviticus?”

This is a valid point and has in fact (most unfortunately) proven to be a major stumbling block in many a well-meaning Catholic’s attempt to navigate their way through the entire Bible, from Genesis to Revelation. In general, practicing Catholics will have a fairly decent knowledge and understanding of the Gospels, which in all fairness many do read and cherish on a regular basis. And many of the Inspired words found in the Epistles of Saints Paul, Peter and John are also highly familiar to us. Overall, there seems to be a lot of truth in the suggestion that we tend to love the New Testament but fear the Old…

So, how can we overcome this fear or reluctance to read and appreciate the Old Testament as the Inspired and Inerrant Word of God that it is? To answer this question, let us briefly recall a famous scene from the final chapter of the Gospel of Saint Luke: Following His glorious Resurrection, Our Lord walked alongside two of His disciples on the road to Emmaus, as they were discussing the events of the past few days. Still unrecognised by them and prompted by their apparent disbelief over the reports of His Resurrection, Our Lord “opened the Scriptures” to them and gave them the first Catholic Bible Study in the Church’s history: “And beginning with Moses and all the prophets, he interpreted to them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself” [(cf. Luke 24:13-35)](https://drbo.org/cgi-bin/d?b=drb&bk=49&ch=24&l=13-35#x).

Note that the “Scriptures” referred to in this verse are none other than the books of the Old Testament (most of the New Testament scriptures had yet to be written!) This means that the key to understanding and appreciating even the most obscure and seemingly incomprehensible sections of that “daunting” section of the Bible we call the Old Testament is Christ Himself. It is Christ who fulfills in the New Testament what was foreshadowed in the Old. As Saint Augustine notably taught, “The New is in the Old concealed; the Old is in the New revealed.”

There is, however, an unfortunate inclination to ignore the Old Testament or to skip over those bits we don’t like. A word of caution against this habit is in order here. In fact, this was the premise of one of the very first heresies to challenge the Catholic faith and refuted by the Church in as early as 144 AD. Through his lack of understanding of its true significance, a theologian by the name of Marcion of Sinope believed that the God of the Old Testament was “evil”, while the God of the New Testament was “good”. This brought him to the conclusion that the Old and New Testaments were incompatible with each other and that Christians should therefore discard and do away with the Old Testament scriptures. Needless to say, Marcion graduated from Catholic school with a “H” for Heresy!

The Church maintains, along with Saint Paul, that "All scripture, inspired of God, is profitable to teach, to reprove, to correct, to instruct in justice" [(2 Timothy 3:16)](https://drbo.org/cgi-bin/d?b=drb&bk=62&ch=3&l=16-#x). Again, as most of the New Testament had yet to be written (and it wouldn’t be for another few centuries until Saint Paul’s own Epistles would be declared canonical by the Church), the word “Scriptures” here refers specifically to the Old Testament.

But where does that leave us? The Inspired and true Word of God it may be, but the Old Testament is still a very steep mountain to scale. Not all of us have the opportunity, let alone the time, to study theology, Biblical exegesis or ancient history in a way that would facilitate even a basic understanding of these Sacred Scriptures. So, while we may not have the chance to study these complex subjects in-depth, perhaps there is a practical alternative we could pursue instead? A guided commentary perhaps? Of those there are certainly plenty. But what about a simple and easy-to-follow introduction to the Old Testament, aimed at a general audience rather than academics? Add to that, the criteria of being in line with Church teaching without personal bias or private interpretations (which are as many as there are stars in the sky). This narrows the search down quite a bit…

Well, the good news is that I might just have the book you are looking for. As a revert to the Catholic faith after many years of spiritual crisis and a brief yet life-changing introduction to the Bible in my college years, I recently (if five years ago still counts as recently) undertook a personal yet detailed study of the Old Testament, and began taking notes of all the amazing discoveries I made in the process. Before long, these notes became more fleshed out until they eventually formed the chapters of a 500-page manuscript which I entitled: “Inspired and Inerrant: A New Guide to the Old Testament” (self-published in 2020).

Upon completion, and having decided to share this work with the world, I sent the manuscript for review to a faithful and well-respected Dominican priest and theologian. Following this review, the manuscript was sent to the Archbishop of Tuam who granted it an Imprimatur, the Church’s official declaration that a book or pamphlet is free from doctrinal or moral error. Currently available in Kindle and paperback editions on Amazon, all it needs now is to find its way onto your reading list.

But what makes this book different from any of the other extensive Bible studies, guides and commentaries already available? For one thing, it provides an introduction, summary and additional commentary to all 46 books of the Old Testament. This means that the seven Deuterocanonical Books, which have been removed from most Protestant Bibles since the revolt of the 16th century, are also included and given a fair hearing. With one chapter dedicated to each Old Testament book, the structure is straightforward and follows the same pattern throughout: we begin with a brief introduction to the book’s historical context and authorship, followed by a quick summary of the major themes and events found therein. Each chapter has its own “Distinguishing Features and Biblical Significance” section, which identifies some of the most important things to note and look out for in this book, followed by a “New Testament Fulfilment” section, which identifies the most significant prophecies and how these are fulfilled through, by and in Jesus Christ and the New Testament scriptures.

All chapters provide further commentary on particular scenes, characters, themes or events from the relevant book. These commentaries are based on the Church’s own teaching, which she Herself derives from the wisdom of the Church Fathers and the great theologians and Doctors who followed in their footsteps. The book’s introduction also gives a brief summary of how the Bible was compiled and identifies some of the essential tools that will help us uncover the hidden treasures scattered throughout these Sacred and Inspired texts. These tools include the Church’s own method of interpreting scripture via the Literal and Spiritual Senses; the fascinating nature of Biblical typology (whereby a person, place or event in the Old Testament foreshadows a person, place or event in the New Testament); and the symbolic significance of numbers, of which there is no shortage in the Old Testament.

So, if you do wish to expand your knowledge of Sacred Scripture but are struggling with the “difficult” parts, this new guide to the Old Testament may provide you with the help you need. So, don’t be a Marcionite, the Old Testament doesn’t bite!

 

**“Inspired and Inerrant: A New Guide to the Old Testament” is currently available for purchase in paperback and Kindle edition on Amazon. With your support, we may be able to expand availability to Catholic bookshops in Ireland as well. Please consider getting your copy today to help defeat the lingering ignorance of Scripture and increase our knowledge and love of Christ. For more information about the author, please visit [www.inigneveniet.com](http://www.inigneveniet.com) for other articles and blog posts pertaining to all things Catholic. Your support is greatly appreciated.**

<!--EndFragment-->